

Sarma2012 - Interaction topologies of MAPK cascade (M3_K2_QSS_PSEQ)

The paper presents the various interaction topologies between the kinases and
phosphatases of MAPK cascade. They are represented as M1, M2, M3 and M4. The
kinases of the cascades are MKKK, MKK and MK, and Phos1, Phos2 and Phos3 are
phosphatases of the system. All three kinases in a M1 type network have
specific phosphatases Phos1, Phos2 and Phos3 for the dephosphorylation
process. In a M2 type system, kinases MKKK and MKK are dephosphorylated by
Phos1 and MK is dephosphorylated by Phos2. The architecture of system like M3
is such that MKKK gets dephosphorylated by Phos1, whereas Phos2
dephosphorylates both MKK and MK. Finally, the MAPK cascade exhibiting more
complex design of interaction such as M4 is such that MKKK and MKK are
dephosphorylated by Phos1 whereas MKK and MK are dephosphorylated by Phos2. In
addition, as it is plausible that the kinases can sequester their respective
phosphatases by binding to them, this is considered in the design of the
systems (PSEQ-sequestrated system; USEQ-Unsequestrated system). The robustness
of different interaction designs of the systems is checked, considering both
MichaelisMenten type kinetics (K1) and elementary mass action kinetics (K2).
In the living systems, the MAPK cascade transmit both short and long duration
signals where short duration signals trigger proliferation and long duration
signals trigger cell differentiation. These signal variants are considered to
interpret the systems behaviour. It is also tested how the robustness and
signal response behaviour of K2 models are affected when K2 assumes quasi
steady state (QSS). The combinations of the above variants resulted in 40
models (MODEL1204280001-40). All these 40 models are available from [BioModels
Database](http://www.ebi.ac.uk/biomodels) .

Models that correspond to type M4 with mass-action kinetics K2, in four
condition 1) USEQ [
[MODEL1204280020](http://www.ebi.ac.uk/biomodels/MODEL1204280020) \-
M4_K2_USEQ], 2) PSEQ [
[MODEL1204280024](http://www.ebi.ac.uk/biomodels/MODEL1204280024) \-
M4_K2_PSEQ], 3) QSS_USEQ [
[MODEL1204280036](http://www.ebi.ac.uk/biomodels/MODEL1204280036) \-
M4_K2_QSS_USEQ] and 4) QSS_PSEQ [
[MODEL1204280040](http://www.ebi.ac.uk/biomodels/MODEL1204280040) \-
M4_K2_QSS_PSEQ] are available from the curated branch. The remaining 36 models
can be accessed from the non-curated branch.

This model [ [MODEL1204280039](http://www.ebi.ac.uk/biomodels/MODEL1204280039)
\- M3_K2_QSS_PSEQ] correspond to type M3 with mass action kinetics K2, in QSS
(quasi steady state) and PSEQ (sequestrated ) condition. This model can
accessed from the non-curated branch of [BioModels
Database](http://www.ebi.ac.uk/biomodels) .

This model is described in the article:

[Different designs of kinase-phosphatase interactions and phosphatase
sequestration shapes the robustness and signal flow in the MAPK
cascade.](http://identifiers.org/pubmed/22748295)

Sarma U, Ghosh I.

BMC Syst Biol. 2012 Jul 2;6(1):82.

Abstract:

ABSTRACT: BACKGROUND: The three layer mitogen activated protein kinase (MAPK)
signaling cascade exhibits different designs of interactions between its
kinases and phosphatases. While the sequential interactions between the three
kinases of the cascade are tightly preserved, the phosphatases of the cascade,
such as MKP3 and PP2A, exhibit relatively diverse interactions with their
substrate kinases. Additionally, the kinases of the MAPK cascade can also
sequester their phosphatases. Thus, each topologically distinct interaction
design of kinases and phosphatases could exhibit unique signal processing
characteristics, and the presence of phosphatase sequestration may lead to
further fine tuning of the propagated signal. RESULTS: We have built four
models of the MAPK cascade, each model with identical kinase-kinase
interactions but unique kinases-phosphatases interactions. Our simulations
unravelled that MAPK cascade's robustness to external perturbations is a
function of nature of interaction between its kinases and phosphatases. The
cascade's output robustness was enhanced when phosphatases were sequestrated
by their target kinases. We uncovered a novel implicit/hidden negative
feedback loop from the phosphatase MKP3 to its upstream kinase Raf-1, in a
cascade resembling the B cell MAPK cascade. Notably, strength of the feedback
loop was reciprocal to the strength of phosphatases' sequestration and
stronger sequestration abolished the feedback loop completely. An experimental
method to verify the presence of the feedback loop is also proposed. We
further showed, when the models were activated by transient signal, memory
(total time taken by the cascade output to reach its unstimulated level after
removal of signal) of a cascade was determined by the specific designs of
interaction among its kinases and phosphatases. CONCLUSIONS: Differences in
interaction designs among the kinases and phosphatases can differentially
shape the robustness and signal response behaviour of the MAPK cascade and
phosphatase sequestration dramatically enhances the robustness to
perturbations in each of the cascade. An implicit negative feedback loop was
uncovered from our analysis and we found that strength of the negative
feedback loop is reciprocally related to the strength of phosphatase
sequestration. Duration of output phosphorylation in response to a transient
signal was also found to be determined by the individual cascade's kinase-
phosphatase interaction design.

This model is hosted on [BioModels Database](http://www.ebi.ac.uk/biomodels)
and identified by:
[MODEL1204280039](http://www.ebi.ac.uk/biomodels/MODEL1204280039) .

To cite BioModels Database, please use: BioModels Database: An enhanced,
curated and annotated resource for published quantitative kinetic models.
PMID: [20587024](http://identifiers.org/pubmed/20587024) .

To the extent possible under law, all copyright and related or neighbouring
rights to this encoded model have been dedicated to the public domain
worldwide. Please refer to [CC0 Public Domain
Dedication>http://creativecommons.org/publicdomain/zero/1.0/] for more
information.

